The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
Today, we continue with part three of our interview with author Jack Williamson.
I'd say in reference to cloning or genetic engineering, would you say that there
is no area of science that man, I mean, man can monkey with anything he wants.
Is there anything which we shouldn't touch, which would be wrong for science to
meddle with or monkey with? Well, I suppose I'm a sort of a relativist. Maybe
I'm a Darwinian evolutionist. It's hard to find any absolute symbols or
standards or whatever of what is wrong and right. And if you look at the whole
evolutionary picture, why some things, patterns of growth and ways of behavior
and so forth lead to the survival of the individual and the species and some
don't. And that's one available standard of behavior. And if you look at that,
why the technologies seem likely to survive and prevail unless they destroy
themselves and whatever is going to destroy the race is obviously bad in that
way. And it seems to me when we open the atom, we're skating on thin ice and
there might be similar hazards in genetic engineering, that is, theoretically,
we could design a form of life that would wipe us out. And maybe we will. Maybe
we need the humanoids to keep us from doing that. That's what they're for. But
personally, being sort of individualist, I hate to give up completely to the
humanoids. There is one more work. I keep forgetting about this one. The CT
work. CT ship, CT shock. Is that the way that's pronounced? CT. CT. Contra
-terrine. Yes, it was. Camel abbreviated Contra-terrine with the letters C and T
and I just spelled it out. That was a work I did for Camel and enjoyed doing it.
I went to him with the idea for a series of stories about the planetary
engineers who would terraform new worlds. That is, would rebuild them, tinker
with the atmosphere, the chemistry, and maybe the gravitation, whatever, to make
them suitable for human settlement. And Camel suggested that some of these new
worlds might be CT, that is, antimatter, which was pretty new to science fiction
then. And I was fascinated and I did a series of stories and then a serial that
eventually became two novels. Where did you come up with the concept terraform?
Did you coin that word or? As far as I know, I invented the word. There are a
few such terms that I think I can claim credit for, such as terraforming and
psionics and the android is distinct from the robot and so forth. Didn't the CT
novel and the short stories lead into a syndicated strip in the newspapers?
Yeah, that was one of my exciting adventures. I was sitting at my desk one day
when the phone rang and the editor of the New York Sunday News was on the line
and wanted to know if I would come to New York and write a comic strip. And I
caught my breath and said I would. And they had read one of the CT novels
reviewed in the New York Times by a rather superior reviewer who said that the
plot was pretty interesting but the way of writing made it look like a science
fiction comic strip. And this was in the early days of commercial TV when people
were turning on the tube on Sunday morning instead of buying the Sunday news.
And somebody thought that if they had exclusive strips instead of syndicated
strips that everybody else had, it might give them a competitive edge. They
originally planned four new comics including a western and a mystery and
adventure I think, but the science fiction one was the only one they did. It ran
for three years but eventually didn't turn out to be the answer to TV. But the
artist was Lee Elias who used to work with Milt Kniff on Terry and the Pirates
and has a nice clean cut style and was good with new and strange characters and
good with machines. And the thing was fun to do. My heart was broken when it
ended because I'd come to enjoy getting a regular check. It was at that time
that I went back part-time into the academic world because I'd started taking
college courses while the strip was running because it didn't take all my time
to write it. And I asked for a graduate assistantship in math and they didn't
have one but I was steered the one in English which turned out to be a fortunate
choice and the academic world did mesh very well with writing. It's wonderful to
be paid to read good literature and talk about it with a congenial group of
students. I enjoyed teaching and found that I was able to continue writing
during holidays and vacations. And maybe I learned a little bit more about
literature and about people and so forth. I think it was a very happy
experience. Didn't you also put together one of the first courses on science
fiction? I think so. Mark Hillegus at Colgate University wrote the first one
that I knew about. That was written up in the National Observer and I took the
article out and showed it to the Curricular Committee and my chairman at Eastern
and got approval for a course. What time was that? That was in, let's see,
Hillegus started his course in 62 and I started mine in 64. I taught it for a
dozen years and spent part of those years doing all I could to promote academic
science fiction elsewhere. I accumulated descriptions of other courses and
lectured and published articles and finally put together a textbook for science
fiction teachers and anthology of articles by the likes of Asimov and Le Guin
and Gunn and others that has finally been published. How do you keep up with
science? You must have a fairly extensive scientific background or any good
science fiction writer must. Well, I've always been, as I said, fascinated with
science as a sort of unfolding mystery. That is, I want to know as much as I can
about the nature of the origins of the universe. I subscribe to a whole group of
magazines, Science News, Scientific American, Science, which is the publication
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, which is much of a
pretty technical, but some things in it I can read and understand. I subscribe
to a couple of astronomy magazines. I've subscribed to a couple of computer
magazines since I bought the word processor. And occasionally I get off to other
events. My wife and I attended the Jupiter flyby at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory March a year ago and got a short story out of that that I called a
descent into the great red spot, though I think the editor is changing the name
of it, and we've been invited back to the Saturn flyby come November. And
something like that, which gives you an opportunity to see actual science at
work and science unfolding, is about as exciting as anything could be. The
Jupiter flyby, where the pictures of Jupiter and its satellites were coming in
on the monitors, one every 48 seconds. Most of them you knew would never be seen
again. They would select some for more study, but most of them would disappear.
And it was just exciting. It was like exploring a new solar system. And these
satellites, up to that time, had just been spots of light in the telescope. And
at the nearest, the best approach is where you could see details just a few
kilometers across. And each satellite was different, with a different history,
with different clues about the origins of itself and the whole solar system and
maybe the universe. Things like that might make science as interesting as
anything I know. To change the subject again, let's see, if I remember now, you
have been president of the Science Fiction Writers Association, or you still
are? I finished my second term less than a month ago, and I hope now to get back
to more science fiction. The term is for how long? Each term is only for one
year. And it was a very rewarding experience. As I guess I've said before,
science fiction is a pretty small, friendly, close community. And a lot of
people in it have been good friends over the years. And it was an opportunity to
try to do something for science fiction. But it took a good amount of time. What
were your duties, if you don't mind? Well, we have about 500 members. We have
all sorts of activities. One of the most important is a grievance committee that
tries to, let's say, avoid difficulties with editors and publishers and so forth
to make sure that they treat us right. We have the nebula awards that are given
each year to recognize work in the field. We attempt to also publicize and
propagandize science fiction. And there are many, many people in the
organization who devote a lot of priceless time and energy to this. But the
whole thing has to be coordinated and people drop out and have to be replaced.
And misunderstandings develop that have to be somehow explained. And new
projects come along that need to be supported. And there wasn't any one thing
that took a great deal of time. But there was a continual flow of problems and
minor decisions and so forth. So that every week I'd have to spend maybe a
couple of days catching up on the mail and the phone calls and whatever. What
are the criteria for membership? Does everybody automatically a member who
publishes a story or does it have to take application? You have to make
application. And an affiliate member has to have at least one story
professionally published. And an active member, the requirement for that is
three stories, short stories or short works. It doesn't have to be fiction
stories or a longer work such as a novel or whatever. And the deals now are $40
a year. And we have two publications and monthly, well, between them they're
monthly, a forum that is essentially for the members with official business and
market reports and whatever. And a bulletin that comes out four times a year
that is devoted to more general articles, background material on science and
science fiction. And the members are usually privileged to attend the Southwest
suite at a convention. And let's say membership is a sort of ticket to a club
that I regard as exciting to belong to. You said there are some 500 members?
Yes. That must be the largest, obviously the largest it's ever been. Oh yes, it
is still growing steadily. The science fiction market is well until the last
year or so was booming. Various publishers, paperback publishers had regular
plans to publish four, six, sometimes eight titles a month. And so that when
Charlie Brown of Locust was keeping a record of the books published and that
kept growing until the total past 1,000 a year, about half reprint and half new,
including fantasy as well as science fiction. And I think that, well, since the
depression or whatever it was, where many publishers have cut back their
schedules and it's a little harder for a new writer to break in than it was. But
it's still a very profitable and exciting field compared to what it was. When
there was one magazine, I got 25 bucks for my first story. And of course the big
money is from films and TV and such things as that. I know you said that it's
hard for you to keep up with everything that's being published today, but do you
have any particularly favorite authors, the younger ones, say starting in the
last 10 years or so, that you think are going to be available? Well, I don't
follow well enough to say anything very intelligent. When I was teaching, I
regarded Ursula Le Guin's Left Hand of Darkness as probably the best recent
novel. And I'm a great admirer of Heinlein, especially the early Heinlein,
Arthur Clarke.
But I don't really keep up. I just read or reread some of Gordon Dixon's Child's
Cycle and impressed with a broad, optimistic view of human change and evolution
that he's presenting. What about New Wave authors? I guess the New Wave
technically has passed, I suppose. I think so. What was your response to that? I
felt that the New Wave was, well, I was sort of anti-New Wave because I felt
that the New Wave people were, first of all, they were intensely pessimistic
about science. And they were trying to throw out the traditional accepted
literary patterns that at least were accepted by me and used in the field. And
turning back to literary experiments by people like Dos Passos and James Joyce.
They had been tried a generation ago and they were brought on as they were
something new again. But I think, by and large, well, I say some of the New Wave
writers were very able. And the impact of the New Wave has been to improve the,
well, the awareness of literary values of style and so forth. So, by and large,
it's been a, quote, good thing. Is it possible to blend, say, the mainstream or
the New Wave attempt with good science fiction? Are they mutually exclusive? Or
is it possible to have good mainstream material at science fiction? Well, I'm
not enthusiastic about consolidating mainstream literature and science fiction.
But I also remember that there was a time when science fiction wasn't walled off
in a category by itself. And I don't think there's any reason it should be. When
Wells was publishing his stories, they were just novels or romances or whatever.
And the science fiction was in a sort of ghetto, quote, ghetto for a generation.
And I think this was partly due to the fact that it was published in pulp
magazines and people looked down on the pulps. I think we're sort of getting
over that. But it's still a category, a publisher's category, like Westerns or
gothics or love romances or whatever. And that means that if Don Wilhelm or Judy
Lynn Del Rey or someone else packages a book in a recognizable science fiction
package, it'll sell enough copies to make a profit. But it's a, I saw a limited
profit because it is shelved in the science fiction recs and the stands, and the
general public doesn't see it. So people who get to be bestsellers, successful,
people like Vonnegut and so
forth, tend to want to get the science fiction label off their stories when they
begin to sell enough copies. But I've never reached that stage myself. I'm proud
to have mine called science fiction. You don't see a more, say comparing, you're
uniquely qualified to do this. Say comparing the readership of science fiction
today with, say, back in the 30s or early 40s, wouldn't you see a greater
proportion of the population reads and appreciate science fiction? I think so.
When I started, nobody knew what it was. You had to explain it. There was one
science fiction magazine. Though some science fiction stories were running in
magazines like Galaxy and people like Wells and Conan Doyle had been publishing
occasional science fiction, not for a specialized audience all along. But
certainly there are more people reading it now than there ever were before. But
there are a lot more people who see it on TV or see science fiction movies than
ever read any of it. When you go to a convention these days where the Star Trek
fans and the comic book fans and the Star Wars fans and so forth sort of
outnumber the science fiction fans. A couple of weeks ago I was at a convention
in Phoenix that was attended by, I think, about 800 people. And I was really the
only identifiable hard science fiction writer there. There were Star Wars
characters and there were comic books authors and so forth who had the big
public. And that's, I'm no complaint about that. You don't think that hurts the
kind of science fiction that you value more, say the movies, the television,
that kind of material? Well, movies have very seldom been good science fiction.
There have been a few good science fiction films, but the science fiction, or
the sort I like, has been called a literature of ideas, and to some extent it
is. And the films, I think, necessarily deal not in ideas, but with emotions,
with sensation. I just saw The Shining, and I liked it as a superb piece of
filmatic craftsmanship. Kubrick wanted to scare the socks off the audience, and
by and large, he did about as well as anybody ever will. There are people who
feel that he neglected characterization, and feel that the explanation of the
supernatural is not consistent, but I feel that Kubrick knew what he was doing,
and he did it. Considering consistency, where it seems to me that he was making
a deliberate appeal to the irrational, to the inexplicable, to the totally
mysterious. And if he tried to explain all the ghosts in the old hotel, why he
would have been letting down the suspense at the same time. So, I love it. Do
you think there have been any successful science fiction movies in good ones?
Well, 2001, I think, was tremendous. And there are a number of others that are
regarded as classics, but typically the movies and TV haven't done what might
have been done. In the first year or two of Star Trek, they were buying
professionally published science fiction stories, or stories written by
professional writers, and I thought many of them were pretty good. And
gradually, as time went on, they went more and more into the standard Hollywood
format, and had less and less originality, creativity, and so forth. And, well,
Space 1999 and Battlestar Galactica are worse. That is, they have plenty of
money for all sorts of expensive special effects, but they have a contempt for
the intelligence of the audience. That is, they don't care about ideas, about
consistency, or whatever. All they're trying to do is create an emotional
effect. And if you know too much science or care too much about believability,
well, the emotional effect doesn't work. What do you think goes into making a
good science fiction story?
Well, of course, I'm something I will believe in myself in emotional effects.
That is, you need a strong conflict, and you need something that will involve
the reader emotionally, so that you need characters that he can either hate or
identify with. And you need some sense of originality. You need, if you can get
it, something new, though that is not always possible. And I tend myself to,
well, to look for a theme for some sort of significant statement about science
or the future or the impact
of science and technology on individual human beings, on human life, on society,
on what the world might be. But I think all that is important is for the writer
to be genuinely interested in what he is saying about something relevant to
science and technology and change. It seems to me the essential thing is
probably that science fiction recognizes that the world is changing under the
impact of technology. The future is going to be different. And the mainstream,
quote, audience either doesn't know this or prefers to forget it or whatever.
That's a good distinction to make. I was going to ask you, is that something you
presented in your classes when you taught science fiction, that it's concerned
with change? I think so. And distinction of mainstream material? Speaking of
your teaching, why do you think science fiction, say, should be taught, say, as
far down as junior high, junior high, high school, college? Is there any
particular value it can offer students? Well, I think that assuming that science
fiction does deal with change, the world is really changing. So the recognition
of this is an element of reality or realism that you don't have in a lot of
classic literature. And kids growing up are going to be living in a world that's
different from the world around them now. It seems to me they have a legitimate
interest in what the future is going to be. And in a practical teaching
situation, you're trying to pull kids off the playground out of in front of TV
and teach them to read and to understand and to think. And sometimes this is
pretty difficult. I've tried various approaches to various literary figures and
periods. And some of them work very well and some of them don't. And it seems to
me that science fiction offers a sort of bridge or door or whatever to the
interests of a lot of students that you don't have if you try to go back to
Shakespeare, let's say.
Yeah, I think one thing science fiction forces a person who's reading it to do
is to think about the future and to think about the world that he's living in as
it's related to the future. I think that's basically what it's about, really, as
much as you can say this about anything. And it seems to me that generally you
can classify it more or less as utopian or dystopian. That is, you can look for
some assumption that technology is good or that technology is bad, that the
future is going to be better or the future is going to be worse, or that the
human being is a helpless victim of his environment and his own nature or that
he can make significant decisions and change his environment and make things
better than they were. So that was basically the approach I took in my classes,
beginning, well, I like to begin with the second two books of Gulliver's
Progress, which is written as deliberate criticism of the early scientists of
the Royal Society and so forth, and to present as far as I could selected
stories that would be briefs on both sides, as dystopias and utopias, optimism
and pessimism, selection from such people as, well, Clark and Heinlein and so
forth on one side, and my own humanoid, so there's plenty of dystopian fiction,
usually better written and more engaging than the optimistic science fiction.
Well, if you're going to categorize like that, say you put Wells and Huxley and
Swift, maybe Ellison on the one hand, maybe Heinlein, Asimov, people like that
on the other, I would put you on that side, the second side with the optimists
or the utopians, ultimately, even though you did write The Humanist. Well,
that's where I'd like to be. Okay, that's fair. This concludes our three-part
interview with science fiction author Jack Williamson.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas. The
Humanist. The Humanist. The Humanist. The Humanist. How did it work?